"Down with the Big Bang;" "The Big Bang Theory Goes Kerplooey;
" "The Big Bang Theory Explodes;" "Sorry, Big Bang
Theory is a Dud;" "Map Challenges Theory of Universe;" 
Astronomers' New Data Jolt Vital Part of Big Bang Theory;" 
"Quasar Clumps Dim Cosmological Theory." These have been 

titles of a few of the articles found in newspapers and 
science journals in the last two or
three years, as the Big Bang theory has received one 
body blow after another. And why not? We know that the 
universe did not begin with 
a big bang -- it will end with a big bang, for "but the 
day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the
which the heavens shall pass 
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein 
shall be burned up" (II Peter 3:10). Cosmologists have thus
miserably failed as to the time, nature, and cause of the Big Bang.The Big Bang
theory concerning the origin of the universe was spawned about 50 years ago, and soon
became the dogma of the evolutionary establishment. It has had many dissenters, however, 
including the British astronomer Sir Fred Hoyle, the Nobel laureate Hannes Alfven, and astronomers 
Geoffrey Burbidge and Halton Arp. According to the Big Bang theory, some 10 to 20 billion years ago, all of
the matter and energy of the universe was compressed into a cosmic egg, or plasma ball, 
consisting of sub-atomic particles and radiation. Nobody knows where the cosmic egg came from, or how it got there -- it was just there. For some equally inexplicable reason, the cosmic egg exploded. As the matter and radiation expanded, so 
the theory says, it cooled sufficiently for elements to form, as protons and electrons 
combined to form hydrogen of atomic weight one, and neutrons were subsequently 
captured to form helium of atomic weight four. Most of the gas that 
formed consisted of hydrogen. These gases, it is then supposed
, expanded radially in all directions throughout the universe 
until they were so highly dispersed that an extremely low vacuum and temperature existed. 
No oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, carbon, sulfur, copper, iron, nickel, ura.